---
layout: distill
title: ZfS in English
description: Collection of English translations of articles from the Zeitschrift für Sozialforschung (1932-1941), volumes 1-9.
tags: archive study
giscus_comments: false
date: 2023-11-06
thumbnail: /assets/img/post2.png
featured: true
related_posts: true
toc:
  - sidebar: true
  - name: Introduction
  - name: Theoretical Foundations of the ZfS
    subsections:
      - name: Volume 1 (1932)
        subsections:
          - name: Issue 1/2 (1932)
          - name: Issue 3 (1932)
      - name: Volume 2 (1933)
        subsections:
          - name: Issue 1 (1933)
          - name: Issue 2 (1933)
      - name: Volume 3 (1934)
        subsections:
          - name: Issue 1 (1934)
          - name: Issue 2 (1934)
          - name: Issue 3 (1934)
      - name: Volume 4 (1935)
        subsections:
          - name: Issue 1 (1935)
          - name: Issue 2 (1935)
          - name: Issue 3 (1935)
      - name: Volume 5 (1936)
        subsections:
          - name: Issue 1 (1936)
          - name: Issue 2 (1936)
      - name: Volume 6 (1937)
        subsections:
          - name: Issue 1 (1937)
          - name: Issue 2 (1937)
          - name: Issue 3 (1937)
      - name: Volume 7 (1938)
        subsections:
          - name: Issue 1/2 (1938)
          - name: Issue 3 (1938)
      - name: Volume 8 (1939)
        subsections:
          - name: Issue 1 (1939)
          - name: Issue 3 (1939)
          - name: Reviews
      - name: Volume 9 (1941)
        subsections:
          - name: Issue 1 (1941)
            subsections:
              - name: Reviews
          - name: Issue 2 (1941)
            subsections:
              - name: Reviews
          - name: Issue 3 (1941)
            subsections:
              - name: Reviews
---

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="/assets/img/post2.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

## Introduction

The _Institut für Sozialforschung_ under Horkheimer’s direction, insisted the _Zeitschrift für Sozialforschung_ (ZfS) remain a German-language periodical, both to preserve the humanist tradition in German culture in defiance of Nazism (against both the Nazi’s claims on and destruction of this culture) and to resist the pressure to publish in English – which IfS members felt with increasing intensity after the leading majority of their number had been forced into exile from Europe to America in a process beginning in 1933. Because the IfS maintained a Paris office throughout the 30’s to serve as a liaison with its publisher, _Librairie Felix Alcan_, the ZfS reflected growing ties between the IfS and French intellectual culture. Notable, consistent exception was made in the ZfS for French-language contributors for articles on sociology and the history of science (including figures such as Alexandre Koyre, Raymond Aron, and Raymond de Saussure). Further study of this all-too-often neglected relationship (and English translations from French contributors) should be a desideratum of future research on the history of the ZfS. The Paris office was closed at the outbreak of WWII and the IfS found an American publisher for its last few issues, renaming the journal “Studies in Philosophy and Social Science”. Under these new conditions, the ZfS published its first (primarily) English issue in 1939 (V.8; I.3), followed by the three English-language issues of its ninth, and final, volume before the journal was discontinued.<d-footnote>Jay, Martin. The Dialectical Imagination: A History of the Frankfurt School and the Institute of Social Research 1923-1950. Hieinemann. London. 1973. 
See the following passages: “In general, the Institut was not especially eager to jettison its past and become fully American. This reluctance can be gauged by the decision to continue using Felix Alcan as publisher even after leaving Europe. By resisting the entreaties of its new American colleagues to publish in America, the Institut felt that it could more easily retain German as the language of the Zeitschrift. Although articles occasionally appeared in English and French and summaries in those languages followed each German essay, the journal remained essentially German until the war. It was in fact the only periodical of its kind published in the language that Hitler was doing so much to debase. As such, the Zeitschrift was seen by Horkheimer and the others as a vital contribution to the preservation of the humanist tradition in German culture, which was threatened with extirpation. Indeed, one of the key elements in the Institut’s self-image was this sense of being the last outpost of a waning culture. Keenly aware of the relation language bears to thought. its members were thus convinced that only by continuing to write in their native tongue could they resist the identification of Nazism with everything German. Although most of the German-speaking world had no way of obtaining copies, the Institut was willing to sacrifice an immediate audience for a future one, which indeed did materialize after the defeat of Hitler. The one regrettable by-product of this decision was the partial isolation from the American academic community that it unavoidably entailed.” (pp. 39-40); And: “Before turning to the Institut’s analysis of American society, its history during the war must be brought up to date. With the expansion of fascism’s power in Europe and America’s entry into the war there came a general reorganization of the Institut’s institutional structure and a reevaluation of its goals. The French branch, the sole remaining Institut outpost in Europe at the outbreak of the war, was closed with the occupation of Paris in 1940. During the thirties, the Paris office had not only been a liaison with the Institut’s publishers and a source· of data for the Studien über Autorität und Familie, but also a link with the French academic and cultural community. Walter Benjamin was not the only contributor of articles to the Zeitschrift living in Paris. Other pieces were written by Celestin BougIe, Raymond Aron, Alexandre Koyre, Jeanne Duprat, Paul Honigsheim, Maxime Leroy, Bernard Groethuysen, and A. Demangeon. In 1938 BougIe was one of two distinguished European scholars to deliver a series of public lectures at the Institut’s New York branch (Morris Ginsberg was the other). Now the link was broken. In addition, the Librairie Felix Alcan could no longer continue to print the Zeitschrift. Instead, the Institut decided to publish in America the third section of the 1939 volume, which appeared in the summer of 1940. This necessitated a reversal of the Institut’s long-standing unwillingness to write in English. As Horkheimer explained in his foreword to the rechristened Studies in Philosophy and Social Science: Philosophy, art, and science have lost their home in most of Europe. England is now fighting desperately against the domination of the totalitarian states. America, especially the United States, is the only continent in which the continuation of scientific life is possible. Within the framework of this country’s democratic institutions, culture still enjoys the freedom without which, we believe, it is unable to exist. In publishing our journal in its new form we wish to give this belief its concrete expression.” (p. 167)</d-footnote>

The difficulty English-language readers face in attempting to read the ZfS in full is a direct consequence of the immanence of the ZfS to its historical context. This immanence has a double expression. On the one hand, these texts express the compulsion to which each individual theoretician was unavoidably and existentially subject in the total, global, unfolding social crisis from which their theorizing emerged. On the other, they express the freedom of critical reflection found in a collective project to win clarity without consolation out of and of this chaos. Each applies themselves, with all the rigors of their own discipline and in coordination with leading scholars in others, to the problem of determining the anti-social forms of 20th century capitalist society in the midst of cascading national-economic conflicts. Critical theory, conceived as “social research” (_Sozialforschung_), is comprehensive:

> The term ‘social research’ [_Sozialforschung_] does not claim to draw new boundary lines on the map of science, which, today, seems very questionable in any case. What is meant by [‘social research’] here is that investigations on the most diverse subject areas and levels of abstraction are held together by the intention that they should advance the theory of contemporary society as a whole. This unifying principle – according to which the individual investigations must be carried out with unconditional empirical rigor, but in view of a central theoretical problem – distinguishes the social research this journal offers from mere factual description as well as [theoretical] construction foreign to the empirical. [Social research] strives to understand the course of society as a whole and, therefore, presupposes that beneath the chaotic surface of events, there is a structure of powers at work – one which, available to the concept, can be known. In social research, history is not seen as the phenomenon of mere arbitrariness, but as a law-governed dynamic, and the knowledge of which is therefore science. Obviously, this depends in a particularly unique way on the development of other disciplines. To reach its goal, which is to comprehend the processes of social life according to the [highest] level of [theoretical] insight possible in its time, social research must endeavor to concentrate a range of specialist sciences on its [unifying] problem and evaluate them for its purposes.

> Max Horkheimer – Vorwort // ZfS vol. 1, no. 1/2, pages i – iv, 1932.

For these theorists, the strictest scientific practice is, at most, right in a wrong world and, at best, makes itself obsolete by facilitating the emergence of a free, but fragile, world taking shape in the fight over real possibility: between the universal self-emancipation of each and all and the indefinite reign of empires under the rule of capital. Or, as the anti-capitalist, anti-fascist avant-garde of the ZfS would say: between socialism and barbarism. It is this that makes the ZfS an organon of _critical_ theory.

For this reason, the <a href="/people">editors</a> of the CTWG believe running the gauntlet of the ZfS as an evolving whole is a worthwhile aspiration for English-language social critics and theorists. To that end, this page is the beginning of a larger project to make the full catalogue of texts from the _Zeitschrift für Sozialforschung_ (1932-1941), volumes 1-9, available in English. Almost all extant translations of articles from the first 8 volumes were translated and published decades after their initial appearance in the pages of the ZfS – and often only partially or individually, scattered across various periodicals, collections, book series, and websites over the course of the last half century. This page will be updated with further high-quality PDFs and scans of English-language translation of ZfS articles as soon as editors are able to acquire them. Any help in this process would be greatly appreciated.

In the future, this project will include calls for translators to work with CTWG members on making more of the ZfS available in English than ever before.

---

## Theoretical Foundations of the ZfS

- Leo Löwenthal. [The Daemonic: Concept of a Negative Philosophy of Religion](https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/lowenthal/1921/demonic.htm) (1921). ([PDF back-up](/assets/pdf/zfs/leo-lowenthal-daemonic-1921.pdf))

- Herbert Marcuse, [“Contributions to a Phenomenology of Historical Materialism”](https://monoskop.org/images/9/95/MARCUSE_Herbert_-_Heideggerian_marxism.pdf) (1928).<d-footnote>Herbert Marcuse. ,<a href="https://monoskop.org/images/9/95/MARCUSE_Herbert_-_Heideggerian_marxism.pdf">Heideggerian Marxism</a>. Ed. R Wolin & J. Abromeit. University of Nebraska Press. 2005. “Contributions to a Phenomenology of Historical Materialism” was first published in Germany as “Beiträge zu einer Phänomenologie des historischen Materialismus” in Philosophische Hefte 1 (1928): 45–68 and was subsequently republished in Marcuse’s Schriften 1 (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1978), 347–84. It first appeared in English in Telos 4 (1969): 3–34. It has been newly translated here by Eric Oberle. “On Concrete Philosophy” originally appeared as “Über konkrete Philosophie” in Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik 62 (1929): 111–20. It was subsequently republished in the Schriften, 385–406. It appears here in English for the first time in a translation by Matthew Erlin “On the Problem of the Dialectic” originally appeared as “Zum Problem der Dialektik.” Part 1 was published in Die Gesellschaft 7 (1930): 15–30 and part 2 was published in Die Gesellschaft 8 (1931): 541–57. Die Gesellschaft was the main theoretical organ of the German Social Democratic Party (spd) at the time and was edited by Rudolf Hilferding. The essay was subsequently republished in the Schriften, 423–44. It was first published in English translation (part 1 was translated by Morton Schoolman and part 2 by Duncan Smith) in Telos 27 (1976): 12–39. It has been retranslated here by John Abromeit.</d-footnote>
  - [“On Concrete Philosophy”](/assets/pdf/zfs/marcuse_conrete.pdf) (1929)
  - [“On the Problem of the Dialectic”](https://monoskop.org/images/9/95/MARCUSE_Herbert_-_Heideggerian_marxism.pdf) (1930)

- Max Horkheimer, [“A New Concept of Ideology?”](https://crittheoryworkgroup.blog/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/a-new-concept-of-ideology-1930-1.pdf) (1930).<d-footnote>Between Philosophy and Social Science. Selected Early Writings – Max Horkheimer. Translated by G. Frederick Hunter, Matthew S. Kramer, and John Torpey. M I T Press 1993. // Original Publication: “Ein neuer Ideologiebegriff?,” Grünbergs Archiv 15, no. 1 (1930).</d-footnote>

- Max Horkheimer, [“Beginnings of the Bourgeois Philosophy of History”](https://crittheoryworkgroup.blog/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/hork-bourg-phil-hist.pdf) (1930).<d-footnote>Between Philosophy and Social Science. Selected Early Writings – Max Horkheimer. Translated by G. Frederick Hunter, Matthew S. Kramer, and John Torpey. M I T Press 1993. // Original publication: Anfänge der bürgerlichen Geschichtsphilosophie (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1930)</d-footnote>

- Erich Fromm, [“The Dogma of Christ”](/assets/pdf/zfs/fromm-1930-dogma-christ.pdf) (1930/1).<d-footnote>Transl. JL Adams. The dogma of Christ and other essays on religion, psychology and culture. New York, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1963. // Original publication: Die Entwicklung des Christusdogmas.: Ein psychoanalytische Studie zur sozialpsychologischen Funktion der Religion. Vienna: Internationaler Psychoanalytischer Verlag, 1931</d-footnote>

- Max Horkheimer, [“The Present Situation of Social Philosophy and the Task of an Institute for Social Research”](/assets/pdf/zfs/1931-pres-situ.pdf) (1931).<d-footnote>Between Philosophy and Social Science. Selected Early Writings – Max Horkheimer. Translated by G. Frederick Hunter, Matthew S. Kramer, and John Torpey. M I T Press 1993. (<a href="https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/horkheimer/1931/present-situation.htm">Alternate link</a>). // Original publication: “Die gegenwärtige Lage der Sozialphilosophie und die Aufgaben eines Instituts für Sozialforschung,” Frankfurter Universitätsreden 27 (1931)</d-footnote>

- Theodor Adorno, [“The Actuality of Philosophy”](/assets/pdf/zfs/adorno_actualityphilosophy-1.pdf) (1931).<d-footnote>Telos March 20, 1977 vol. 1977 no. 31 120-133.</d-footnote>
  - [“Idea of Natural History”](/assets/pdf/zfs/adorno_historynature.pdf) (1932).<d-footnote>Adorno, Theodor W. (1984). The idea of natural history. Telos: Critical Theory of the Contemporary 1984 (60):111-24.</d-footnote>

- Herbert Marcuse, [Hegel’s Ontology and the Theory of Historicity](https://monoskop.org/images/9/9e/Marcuse_Herbert_Hegels_Ontology_and_Theory_of_Historicity.pdf) (1932).<d-footnote>Transl. Seyla Benhabib. M I T Press. 1987. // Original Publication: Hegels Ontologie Und Die Grundlegung Einer Theorie der Geschichtlichkeit. V. Klostermann. (1932)</d-footnote>
  - [“New Sources on the Foundation of Historical Materialism”](https://monoskop.org/images/9/95/MARCUSE_Herbert_-_Heideggerian_marxism.pdf) (1932). <d-footnote>Herbert Marcuse. <a href="https://monoskop.org/images/9/95/MARCUSE_Herbert_-_Heideggerian_marxism.pdf">Heideggerian Marxism</a>. Ed. R Wolin & J. Abromeit. University of Nebraska Press. 2005. “New Sources on the Foundation of Historical Materialism” was first published as “Neue Quellen zur Grundlegen des Historischen Materialismus” in Die Gesellschaft 9 (1932): 136–74 and was subsequently republished in the Schriften, 509–55. It was first published in English in a translation by Joris de Bres in Studies in Critical Philosophy (London: New Left Review Books, 1972), 1–48. De Bres’s translation has been lightly revised by John Abromeit here to render it terminologically consistent with the other essays in the volume. “On the Philosophical Foundations of the Concept of Labor in Economics” was first published as “Über die philosophischen Grundlagen des wirtschaftswissenschaftlichen Begriff der Arbeit” in Archiv für Sozialwissenschaften und Sozialpolitik 69 (1933): 257–92 and was republished in the Schriften, 556–94. It was first published in English, translated by Douglas Kellner, in Telos 16 (1973): 9–37. It has been retranslated here by John Abromeit. Marcuse wrote one version of “German Philosophy, 1871–1933” (“Deutsche Philosophie im zwanzigsten Jahrhundert”) in French in 1934 when he was living in Geneva, Switzerland, just prior to his joining the Institute for Social Research and departing for the United States in June 1934. It has never been published before in any language; the manuscript is located in the Marcuse Archives in Frankfurt, catalogue number 0030.01. Ron Haas has translated the text from French into English here.</d-footnote>
  - [“On the Philosophical Foundations of the Concept of Labor in Economics”](https://monoskop.org/images/9/95/MARCUSE_Herbert_-_Heideggerian_marxism.pdf) (1933)
  - [“German Philosophy, 1871–1933”](https://monoskop.org/images/9/95/MARCUSE_Herbert_-_Heideggerian_marxism.pdf) (1934)

### Volume 1 (1932)

#### Issue 1/2 (1932)

- Max Horkheimer – Bemerkungen über Wissenschaft und Krise // vol. 1, no. 1/2, pages 1 – 7, 1932. English: [“Notes on Science and the Crisis”](https://monoskop.org/images/7/74/Horkheimer_Max_Critical_Theory_Selected_Essays_2002.pdf)<d-footnote>Horkheimer, Max (1972). Critical theory: selected essays. New York: Continuum.</d-footnote>

- Erich Fromm – Über Methode und Aufgabe einer analytischen Sozialpsychologie // vol. 1, no. 1/2, pages 28 – 54, 1932. – English: [“The Method and Function of an Analytic Social Psychology: Notes on Psychoanalysis and Historical Materialism”](/assets/pdf/zfs/fromm-method-and-function.pdf) <d-footnote>Arato, Andrew & Gebhardt, Eike (eds.) (1977). The Essential Frankfurt School Reader. New York: Continuum.</d-footnote>

- Leo Löwenthal – Zur gesellschaftlichen Lage der Literatur // vol. 1, no. 1/2, pages 85 – 102, 1932. English: [“On Sociology of Literature”](/assets/pdf/zfs/lowenthal-socio-of-lit-1932.pdf)<d-footnote>L. Lowenthal. Literature and Mass Culture. Routledge. 1984.</d-footnote>

- Henryk Grossmann – Die Wert-Preis-Transformation bei Marx und das Krisenproblem // vol. 1, no. 1/2, pages 55 – 84, 1932. English – [“The Value-Price Transformation in Marx and the Problem of Crisis”](/assets/pdf/zfs/h-grossmann-value-price-crisis.pdf).<d-footnote>Grossman, H. (2016). The Value-Price Transformation in Marx and the Problem of Crisis. Historical Materialism, 24(1), 105-134.</d-footnote> (+ [New introduction](/assets/pdf/zfs/r-kuhn-h-grossmann-vpt-intro.pdf) by R Kuhn)<d-footnote>Kuhn, R. (2016). Introduction to Henryk Grossman, ‘The Value-Price Transformation in Marx and the Problem of Crisis’. Historical Materialism, 24(1), 91-103.</d-footnote>

- Theodor Wiesengrund-Adorno – Zur gesellschaftlichen Lage der Musik // vol. 1, no. 1/2, pages 103 – 124, 1932. English: [“On the Social Situation of Music”](/assets/pdf/zfs/adorno-social-situ-music-32-1.pdf)<d-footnote>Adorno, Theodor W. (1978). On the Social Situation of Music. Telos: Critical Theory of the Contemporary 35:129.</d-footnote>

- Max Horkheimer – Geschichte und Psychologie // vol. 1, no. 1/2, pages 125 – 144, 1932. English: [“History and Psychology”](/assets/pdf/zfs/history-and-psychology-1932-2.pdf)<d-footnote>Between Philosophy and Social Science. Selected Early Writings – Max Horkheimer. Translated by G. Frederick Hunter, Matthew S. Kramer, and John Torpey. M I T Press 1993.</d-footnote>

#### Issue 3 (1932)

- Erich Fromm // Die psychoanalytische Charakterologie und ihre Bedeutung für die Sozialpsychologie – vol. 1, no. 3, pages 253 – 277, 1932. – English: [“Psychoanalytic Characterology and Its Relevance for Social Psychology”](/assets/pdf/zfs/characterology-essay.pdf)<d-footnote>Fromm, Erich. The Crisis of Psychoanalysis: Essays on Freud, Marx and Social Psychology. 1st ed. Newburyport: Open Road Distribution, 2014. Print.</d-footnote>

### Volume 2 (1933)

#### Issue 1 (1933)

- Max Horkheimer – Materialismus und Metaphysik // vol. 2, no. 1, pages 1 – 33, 1933. English: [“Materialism and Metaphysics”](https://monoskop.org/images/7/74/Horkheimer_Max_Critical_Theory_Selected_Essays_2002.pdf)<d-footnote>Horkheimer, Max (1972). Critical theory: selected essays. New York: Continuum.</d-footnote>

- Leo Löwenthal – Conrad Ferdinand Meyers heroische Geschichtsauffassung // vol. 2, no. 1, pages 34 – 62, 1933. English: [“Conrad Ferdinand Meyer: An Apologia of the Upper Middle Class”](/assets/pdf/zfs/cfm-essay.pdf)<d-footnote>Lowenthal, L. (1980). Conrad Ferdinand Meyer: An Apologia of the Upper Middle Class. Telos: Critical Theory of the Contemporary 1980 (45):97-113.</d-footnote>

#### Issue 2 (1933)

- Max Horkheimer – Materialismus und Moral // vol. 2, no. 2, pages 162 – 197, 1933. English: [“Materialism and Morality”](/assets/pdf/zfs/horkheimer-materialism-and-morality-2.pdf)<d-footnote>Horkheimer, Max (1986). Materialism and morality. Telos: Critical Theory of the Contemporary 1986 (69):85-118.</d-footnote> ([Alternate English translation](/assets/pdf/zfs/mat-moral-2.pdf))<d-footnote>Between Philosophy and Social Science. Selected Early Writings – Max Horkheimer. Translated by G. Frederick Hunter, Matthew S. Kramer, and John Torpey. M I T Press 1993.</d-footnote>

### Volume 3 (1934)

#### Issue 1 (1934)

- Max Horkheimer – Zum Rationalismusstreit in der gegenwärtigen Philosophie // vol. 3, no. 1, pages 1 – 53, 1934. English: [“The Rationalism Debate in Contemporary Philosophy”](/assets/pdf/zfs/rationalism-debate-1.pdf)<d-footnote>Between Philosophy and Social Science. Selected Early Writings – Max Horkheimer. Translated by G. Frederick Hunter, Matthew S. Kramer, and John Torpey. M I T Press 1993.</d-footnote>

- Walter Benjamin – Zum gegenwärtigen gesellschaftlichen Standort des französischen Schriftstellers // vol. 3, no. 1, pages 54 – 78, 1934. English: [“The Present Social Situation of the French Writer”](/assets/pdf/zfs/benjamin-present-social-situation-of-the-french-writer-1934-1.pdf)<d-footnote>Walter Benjamin: Selected Writings, Volume 2, Part 2: 1931-1934, eds. Michael W. Jennings, Howard Eiland and Gary Smith, 1999; 2005</d-footnote>

- Pauline V. Young – [Differentiation of Delinquent and Non-Delinquent Boys](/assets/pdf/zfs/pauline-young-delinquent.pdf) // vol. 3, no. 1, pages 79 – 81, 1934.

#### Issue 2 (1934)

- Herbert Marcuse – Der Kampf gegen den Liberalismus in der totalitären Staatsauffassung // vol. 3, no. 2, pages 161 – 195, 1934. – English: [“The struggle against liberalism in the totalitarian view of the state”](https://monoskop.org/images/5/57/Marcuse_Herbert_Negations_Essays_in_Critical_Theory_2009.pdf) <d-footnote>Marcuse, Herbert (1968). Negations: essays in critical theory. London: Free Association Books.</d-footnote>

- Erich Fromm – Die sozialpsychologische Bedeutung der Mutterrechtstheorie // vol. 3, no. 2, pages 196 – 227, 1934. – [“The Theory of Mother Right and its Relevance for Social Psychology“](/assets/pdf/zfs/mother-right-theory-soc-psych.pdf)<d-footnote>Fromm, Erich. The Crisis of Psychoanalysis: Essays on Freud, Marx and Social Psychology. 1st ed. Newburyport: Open Road Distribution, 2014. Print.</d-footnote>

#### Issue 3 (1934)

- Max Horkheimer – Zu Bergsons Metaphysik der Zeit // vol. 3, no. 3, pages 321 – 342, 1934. English [“On Bergson’s Metaphysics of Time”](https://www.radicalphilosophy.com/article/on-bergsons-metaphysics-of-time)

- Leo Löwenthal – Die Auffassung Dostojewskis im Vorkriegsdeutschland // vol. 3, no. 3, pages 343 – 382, 1934. – English: [“The Reception of Dostoevsky in Pre-World War I Germany”](/assets/pdf/zfs/lowenthal-dostoyevsky.pdf)<d-footnote>L. Lowenthal. Literature and Mass Culture. Routledge. 1984.</d-footnote>

### Volume 4 (1935)

#### Issue 1 (1935)

- Max Horkheimer – Bemerkungen zur philosophischen Anthropologie // vol. 4, no. 1, pages 1 – 25, 1935. English: [“Remarks on Philosophical Anthropology”](/assets/pdf/zfs/remarks-on-phil-anthro-1.pdf)<d-footnote>Between Philosophy and Social Science. Selected Early Writings – Max Horkheimer. Translated by G. Frederick Hunter, Matthew S. Kramer, and John Torpey. M I T Press 1993.</d-footnote>

- K. A. Wittfogel – [The Foundations and Stages of Chinese Economic History](/assets/pdf/zfs/kaw-stages-of-chines-econ-history.pdf) // vol. 4, no. 1, pages 26 – 60, 1935.

- Charles A. Beard – [The Social Sciences in the United States](/assets/pdf/zfs/ca-beard-socsci-us.pdf) // vol. 4, no. 1, pages 61 – 65, 1935.

#### Issue 2 (1935)

- Henryk Grossmann – Die gesellschaftlichen Grundlagen der mechanistischen Philosophie und die Manufaktur // vol. 4, no. 2, pages 161 – 231, 1935. English: [“The Social Foundations of the Mechanistic Philosophy and Manufacture”](/assets/pdf/zfs/h-grossmann-social-found.pdf)<d-footnote>Grossmann, Henryk (2009). The social foundations of the mechanistic philosophy and manufacture. In Boris Hessen, Henryk Grossmann, Gideon Freudenthal & Peter McLaughlin (eds.), The Social and Economic Roots of the Scientific Revolution: Texts by Boris Hessen and Henryk Grossmann. Springer.</d-footnote>

- Walter Benjamin – Probleme der Sprachsoziologie // vol. 4, no. 2, pages 248 – 268, 1935. English: [“Problems in the Sociology of Language“](/assets/pdf/zfs/benjamin-problems-in-the-sociology-of-language-1935-1.pdf)<d-footnote>Walter Benjamin: Selected Writings, Volume 3, 1935-1938, eds. Howard Eiland and Michael W. Jennings, 2002; 2006.</d-footnote>

#### Issue 3 (1935)

- Max Horkheimer – Zum Problem der Wahrheit // vol. 4, no. 3, pages 321 – 364, 1935. English: [“On the Problem of Truth“](/assets/pdf/zfs/on-the-problem-of-truth-1.pdf)<d-footnote>Between Philosophy and Social Science. Selected Early Writings – Max Horkheimer. Translated by G. Frederick Hunter, Matthew S. Kramer, and John Torpey. M I T Press 1993.</d-footnote>

- Erich Fromm – Die gesellschaftliche Bedingtheit der psychoanalytischen Therapie // vol. 4, no. 3, pages 365 – 397, 1935. English [“Social Determinants of Psychoanalytic Therapy“](/assets/pdf/zfs/fromm-soc-det-psych-therapy.pdf)<d-footnote>Int Forum Psychoanal 9:(149-165), 2000</d-footnote>

### Volume 5 (1936)

#### Issue 1 (1936)

- Herbert Marcuse – Zum Begriff des Wesens // vol. 5, no. 1, pages 1 – 39, 1936. English: [“The Concept of Essence”](https://monoskop.org/images/5/57/Marcuse_Herbert_Negations_Essays_in_Critical_Theory_2009.pdf)<d-footnote>Marcuse, Herbert (1968). Negations: essays in critical theory. London: Free Association Books.</d-footnote>

- Walter Benjamin – L’œuvre d’art à l’époque de sa reproduction mécanisée // vol. 5, no. 1, pages 40 – 68, 1936. English: “The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction.” [Second Version](/assets/pdf/zfs/benjamin-wamr-2nd.pdf) (basis for the first version published, abridged and in French, in the ZfS)<d-footnote>Walter Benjamin: Selected Writings, Volume 3, 1935-1938, eds. Howard Eiland and Michael W. Jennings, 2002; 2006.</d-footnote>; [Third Version](/assets/pdf/zfs/benjamin-wamr-3rd.pdf) (revised through 1939, the basis of the 1955 publication in Benjamin’s Schriften)<d-footnote>Walter Benjamin: Selected Writings, Volume 4, 1938-1940, eds. Howard Eiland and Michael W. Jennings, 2003; 2006.</d-footnote>

- Margaret Mead – [On the Institutionalized Rôle of Women and Character Formation](/assets/pdf/zfs/m-mead-zfs.pdf) // vol. 5, no. 1, pages 69 – 75, 1936.

- Hilde Weiss – [Die “Enquête Ouvrière” von Karl Marx](https://notesfrombelow.org/article/hilde-weiss-die-enquete-ouvriere-von-karl-marx-193) // vol. 5, no. 1, pages Pages 76-98, 1936.

#### Issue 2 (1936)

- Max Horkheimer – Egoismus und Freiheitsbewegung: Zur Anthropologie des bürgerlichen Zeitalters // vol. 5, no. 2, pages 161 – 234, 1936. English: [“Egoism and Freedom Movements: On the Anthropology of the Bourgeois Era”](/assets/pdf/zfs/horkheimer-egoism-freedom-movements-1.pdf)<d-footnote>Horkheimer, Max (1982). Egoism and the Freedom Movement. Telos: Critical Theory of the Contemporary 54:10.</d-footnote>([Alternative English translation](/assets/pdf/zfs/egoism-freedom-2.pdf))<d-footnote>Between Philosophy and Social Science. Selected Early Writings – Max Horkheimer. Translated by G. Frederick Hunter, Matthew S. Kramer, and John Torpey. M I T Press 1993.</d-footnote>

- Hektor Rottweiler (Adorno) – Über Jazz // vol. 5, no. 2, pages 235 – 259, 1936. English – [“On Jazz“](/assets/pdf/zfs/adorno-on-jazz.pdf)<d-footnote>Theodor W. Adorno and Jamie Owen Daniel Discourse Vol. 12, No. 1, A Special issue on Music (Fall-Winter 1989-90), pp. 45-69</d-footnote>

### Volume 6 (1937)

#### Issue 1 (1937)

- Max Horkheimer – Der neueste Angriff auf die Metaphysik // vol. 6, no. 1, pages 4 – 53, 1937. English: [“The Latest Attack on Metaphysics”](https://monoskop.org/images/7/74/Horkheimer_Max_Critical_Theory_Selected_Essays_2002.pdf)<d-footnote>Horkheimer, Max (1972). Critical theory: selected essays. New York: Continuum.</d-footnote>

- Herbert Marcuse – Über den affirmativen Charakter der Kultur // vol. 6, no. 1, pages 54 – 94, 1937. English: [“On the Affirmative Character of Culture”](https://monoskop.org/images/5/57/Marcuse_Herbert_Negations_Essays_in_Critical_Theory_2009.pdf)<d-footnote>Marcuse, Herbert (1968). Negations: essays in critical theory. London: Free Association Books.</d-footnote>

- Paul F. Lazarsfeld – [Some Remarks on the Typological Procedures in Social Research](/assets/pdf/zfs/lazarsfeld-typology.pdf) // vol. 6, no. 1, pages 119 – 139, 1937.

- Otto Neurath – [Inventory of the Standard of Living](/assets/pdf/zfs/o-neurath-standard-of-living.pdf) // vol. 6, no. 1, pages 140 – 151, 1937.

- David Efron , John P. Foley, Jr. – [Gestural Behavior and Social Setting](/assets/pdf/zfs/gbss.pdf) // vol. 6, no. 1, pages 152 – 161, 1937.

#### Issue 2 (1937)

- Max Horkheimer – Traditionelle und kritische Theorie // vol. 6, no. 2, pages 245 – 294, 1937. English: [“Traditional and Critical Theory”](https://monoskop.org/images/7/74/Horkheimer_Max_Critical_Theory_Selected_Essays_2002.pdf)<d-footnote>Horkheimer, Max (1972). Critical theory: selected essays. New York: Continuum.</d-footnote>

- Leo Löwenthal – Knut Hamsun: Zur Vorgeschichte der autoritären Ideologie // vol. 6, no. 2, pages 295 – 345, 1937. – English: [“Knut Hamsun”](/assets/pdf/zfs/lowenthal-knut-hamsun.pdf)<d-footnote>Arato, Andrew & Gebhardt, Eike (eds.) (1977). The Essential Frankfurt School Reader. New York: Continuum.</d-footnote>

- Walter Benjamin – Eduard Fuchs, der Sammler und der Historiker // vol. 6, no. 2, pages 346 – 381, 1937. English: [“Eduard Fuchs: Collector and Historian”](https://files.libcom.org/files/Eduard%20Fuchs,%20Collector%20and%20Historian%20-%20W.%20Benjamin%201937_0.pdf)<d-footnote>Benjamin, Walter, and Knut Tarnowski. “Eduard Fuchs: Collector and Historian.” New German Critique, no. 5, 1975, pp. 27–58.</d-footnote>

- C. M. Bowra – [Sociological Remarks on Greek Poetry](/assets/pdf/zfs/bowra-socio-grk-poetry.pdf) // vol. 6, no. 2, pages 382 – 399, 1937.

#### Issue 3 (1937)

- Max Horkheimer , Herbert Marcuse – Philosophie und kritische Theorie // vol. 6, no. 3, pages 625 – 647, 1937. English: [Horkheimer](https://monoskop.org/images/7/74/Horkheimer_Max_Critical_Theory_Selected_Essays_2002.pdf) (“Postscript”)<d-footnote>Horkheimer, Max (1972). Critical theory: selected essays. New York: Continuum.</d-footnote>; [Marcuse](https://monoskop.org/images/5/57/Marcuse_Herbert_Negations_Essays_in_Critical_Theory_2009.pdf)(“Philosophy and Critical Theory”)<d-footnote>Marcuse, Herbert (1968). Negations: essays in critical theory. London: Free Association Books.</d-footnote>

### Volume 7 (1938)

#### Issue 1/2 (1938)

- Max Horkheimer – Montaigne und die Funktion der Skepsis // vol. 7, no. 1/2, pages 1 – 54, 1938. English: [“Montaigne and the Function of Skepticism”](/assets/pdf/zfs/montaigne-skepticism.pdf)<d-footnote>Between Philosophy and Social Science. Selected Early Writings – Max Horkheimer. Translated by G. Frederick Hunter, Matthew S. Kramer, and John Torpey. M I T Press 1993.</d-footnote>

- Herbert Marcuse – Zur Kritik des Hedonismus // vol. 7, no. 1/2, pages 55 – 89, 1938. English: [“On Hedonism”](https://monoskop.org/images/5/57/Marcuse_Herbert_Negations_Essays_in_Critical_Theory_2009.pdf)<d-footnote>Marcuse, Herbert (1968). Negations: essays in critical theory. London: Free Association Books.</d-footnote>

#### Issue 3 (1938)

- T. W. Adorno – Über den Fetischcharakter in der Musik und die Regression des Hörens // vol. 7, no. 3, pages 321 – 356, 1938. English: [“On the Fetish Character in Music and the Regression of Listening”](https://fswg.files.wordpress.com/2015/02/on-the-fetish-character-in-music-and-the-regression-of-listening.pdf)<d-footnote>Arato, Andrew & Gebhardt, Eike (eds.) (1977). The Essential Frankfurt School Reader. New York: Continuum.</d-footnote>

### Volume 8 (1939)

#### Issue 1/2 (1939)

- Walter Benjamin – Uber einige Motive bei Baudelaire // vol. 8, no. 1/2, pages 50 – 91, 1939. English: [“On Some Motifs in Baudelaire”](https://langurbansociology.files.wordpress.com/2013/01/benjamin-on-some-motifs-in-baudelaire.pdf)<d-footnote>Walter Benjamin: Selected Writings, Volume 4, 1938-1940, eds. Howard Eiland and Michael W. Jennings, 2003; 2006.</d-footnote>

- Max Horkheimer – Die Juden und Europa // vol. 8, no. 1/2, pages 115 – 137, 1939. English: [“The Jews and Europe”](https://thecharnelhouse.org/2015/03/20/the-jews-and-europe/)

- K. A. Wittfogel – [The Society of Prehistoric China](/assets/pdf/zfs/wittfogel-prehistoric-china.pdf) // vol. 8, no. 1/2, pages 138 – 186, 1939.

- Herbert Marcuse – [Review of John Dewey Logic, The Theory of Inquiry](https://philpapers.org/archive/MARHMR.pdf) // vol. 8, no. 1/2, pages 221 – 228, 1939.

#### Issue 3 (1939)

- Max Horkheimer – [Forward](/assets/pdf/zfs/horkheimer-fw-v8-i3.pdf) // vol. 8, no. 3, pages 321 – 321, 1939.

- Max Horkheimer –[The Social Function of Philosophy](https://monoskop.org/images/7/74/Horkheimer_Max_Critical_Theory_Selected_Essays_2002.pdf) // vol. 8, no. 3, pages 322 – 337, 1939.

- Franz L. Neumann – [Types of Natural Law](/assets/pdf/zfs/f-neumann-natlaw.pdf) // vol. 8, no. 3, pages 338 – 361, 1939.

- Herbert Marcuse – [An Introduction to Hegel’s Philosophy](/assets/pdf/zfs/marcuse-intro-to-hegel.pdf) // vol. 8, no. 3, pages 394 – 412, 1939.

- T. W. Adorno – [On Kierkegaard’s Doctrine of Love](/assets/pdf/zfs/adorno-kierk-love.pdf) // vol. 8, no. 3, pages 413 – 429, 1939.

- Max Horkheimer – [The Relation between Psychology and Sociology in the Work of Wilhelm Dilthey](/assets/pdf/zfs/horkheimer-psych-soc-dilthey-engl.pdf) // vol. 8, no. 3, pages 430 – 443, 1939.

- Otto Kirchheimer – [Criminal Law in National-Socialist Germany](/assets/pdf/zfs/kirchheimer-criminal-law.pdf) // vol. 8, no. 3, pages 444 – 463, 1939.

#### Reviews

- Leo Lowenthal – [Reivew of Jung's The Integration of the Personality](/assets/pdf/zfs/lowenthal-jung-review-integration.pdf) // vol. 8, no. 3, pages 479 – 481, 1939.
- Frederick Pollock – [Technological Trends and National Policy](/assets/pdf/zfs/pollock-review-v8-i3.pdf) // vol. 8, no. 3, pages 483 – 490, 1939.
- Henryk Grossman – [Turning Points in Business Cycles](/assets/pdf/zfs/grossmann-review-v8-i3.pdf) // vol. 8, no. 3, pages 490 – 492, 1939.
- F. Weil – [The Coming Struggle for Latin America](/assets/pdf/zfs/f-weil-v8-i3.pdf) // vol. 8, no. 3, pages 492 – 494, 1939.

### Volume 9 (1941)

#### Issue 1 (1941)

- Max Horkheimer – [Preface](/assets/pdf/zfs/horkheimer-v9-i1-preface.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 1, pages 1 – 1, 1941.

- Paul F. Lazarsfeld – [Remarks on Administrative and Critical Communications Research](/assets/pdf/zfs/lazarsfeld-remarks-v9-i1.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 1, pages 2 – 16, 1941.

- T. W. Adorno , George Simpson – [On Popular Music](/assets/pdf/zfs/adorno-simpson-pop-music.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 1, pages 17 – 48, 1941.

- Harold D. Lasswell – [Radio as an Instrument of Reducing Personal Insecurity](/assets/pdf/zfs/hd-lass-radio.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 1, pages 49 – 64, 1941.

- Herta Herzog – [On Borrowed Experience: An Analysis of Listening to Daytime Sketches](/assets/pdf/zfs/herta-herzog-radio.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 1, pages 65 – 95, 1941.

- William Dieterle – [Hollywood and the European Crisis](/assets/pdf/zfs/dieterle-hollywood.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 1, pages 96 – 103, 1941.

- Charles A. Siepmann – [Radio and Education](/assets/pdf/zfs/siepmann-radio.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 1, pages 104 – 120, 1941.

- Max Horkheimer – [Notes on Institute Activities](/assets/pdf/zfs/horkheimer-notes-on-institute-activities.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 1, pages 121 – 123, 1941.

- [Research Project on Antisemitism](/assets/pdf/zfs/research-project-on-anti-semitism.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 1, pages 124 – 143, 1941.

##### Reviews

- Herbert Marcuse – [Review of Dewey's Theory of Valuation](/assets/pdf/zfs/marcuse-rev-dewey-valuation.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 1, pages 144 – 148, 1941.
- T. W. Adorno , Eunice Cooper – [American Jazz Music](/assets/pdf/zfs/adorno-cooper-rev-of-jazz.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 1, pages 167 – 178, 1941.
- Henryk Grossman – [Business Cycles](/assets/pdf/zfs/grossmann-business-cycles-rev.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 1, pages 181 – 189, 1941.

#### Issue 2 (1941)

- Max Horkheimer – [Preface](/assets/pdf/zfs/horkheimer-pref-state-cap.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 2, pages 195 – 199, 1941.

- Frederick Pollock – [State Capitalism: Its Possibilities and Limitations](https://platypus1917.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/pollock_statecapitalism.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 2, pages 200 – 225, 1941.

- A. R. L. Guiland – [Technological Trends and Economic Structure under National Socialism](/assets/pdf/zfs/gurland-tech-trends-v9-i2.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 2, pages 226 – 263, 1941.

- Otto Kirchheimer – [Changes in the Structure of Political Compromise](/assets/pdf/zfs/kirchheimer-political-compromise.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 2, pages 264 – 289, 1941.

- Max Horkheimer – [Art and Mass Culture](https://monoskop.org/images/7/74/Horkheimer_Max_Critical_Theory_Selected_Essays_2002.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 2, pages 290 – 304, 1941.

- T. W. Adorno – [Spengler Today](/assets/pdf/zfs/adorno-spengler.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 2, pages 305 – 325, 1941.

##### Reviews

- Felix Weil – [The Bottlenecks of Business](/assets/pdf/zfs/f-weil-bottlenecks-business-rev.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 2, pages 326 – 336, 1941.
- Henryk Grossman – [The Output of Manufacturing Industries 1899-1937](/assets/pdf/zfs/gbss.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 2, pages 352 – 354, 1941.
- Karl Korsch – [The Armed Horde 1793-1939: A Study of the Rise, Survival, and Decline of the Mass Army](/assets/pdf/zfs/korsch-armed-horde-rev.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 2, pages 358 – 361, 1941.

#### Issue 3 (1941)

- Max Horkheimer – [Preface](/assets/pdf/zfs/horkheimer-preface-v9-i3.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 3, pages 365 – 365, 1941.

- Max Horkheimer – [The End of Reason](/assets/pdf/zfs/horkheimer-end-of-reason.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 3, pages 366 – 388, 1941.

- T. W. Adorno – [Veblen’s Attack on Culture: Remarks Occasioned by the Theory of the Leisure Class](/assets/pdf/zfs/adorno-veblen-culture.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 3, pages 389 – 413, 1941.

- Herbert Marcuse – [Some Social Implications of Modern Technology](https://nissenbaum.tech.cornell.edu/papers/Socialimplicationsoftechnology.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 3, pages 414 – 439, 1941.

- Frederick Pollock – [Is National Socialism a New Order?](/assets/pdf/zfs/pollock-nat-soc.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 3, pages 440 – 455, 1941.

- Otto Kirchheimer – [The Legal Order of National Socialism](/assets/pdf/zfs/kirchheimer-nat-soc.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 3, pages 456 – 475, 1941.

##### Reviews

- Paul Tillich [Reason and Revolution: Hegel and the Rise of Social Theory](/assets/pdf/zfs/tillich-v9-i1.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 3, pages 476 – 478, 1941.
- T. W. Adorno – [Unmittelbarkeit und Sinndeutung: Aufsätze zur Ausgestaltung des Systems der Philosophie](/assets/pdf/zfs/adorno-unmitt-v9.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 3, pages 479 – 482, 1941.
- Herbert Marcuse – [Kleines Lehrbuch des Positivismus](/assets/pdf/zfs/marcuse-review-of-kleines-lehrbuch-and-russell.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 3, pages 483 – 486, 1941.
- Herbert Marcuse – [The Problems of Logic](/assets/pdf/zfs/marcuse-logic-lit-rev.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 3, pages 487 – 490, 1941.
- Herbert Marcuse – [Social Psychology of Modern Life](/assets/pdf/zfs/marcuse-soc-psych-rev.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 3, pages 500 – 501, 1941.
- Herbert Marcuse – [Dante et la philosophie](/assets/pdf/zfs/marcuse-dante-phil-rev.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 3, pages 512 – 513, 1941.
- Herbert Marcuse – [Adversity’s Noblemen: The Italian Humanists on Happiness](/assets/pdf/zfs/marcuse-italian-humanists.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 3, pages 513 – 514, 1941.
- Henryk Grossman – [A History of Magic and Experimental Science](/assets/pdf/zfs/grossmann-hist-magic-sci.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 3, pages 514 – 519, 1941.
- T. W. Adorno [The Life of Richard Wagner](/assets/pdf/zfs/adorno-life-of-wagner.pdf), 1859-1866 // vol. 9, no. 3, pages 523 – 525, 1941.
- Herbert Marcuse [. . . Shall not Perish from the Earth](/assets/pdf/zfs/marcuse-shall-not-perish.pdf) // vol. 9, no. 3, pages 531 – 531, 1941.

